Good afternoon.
Is everybody ready to go home?
No?
Okay.
Well, then make yourselves comfortable.
So hello yet again.
In case you don't know, I'm Matt Drance.
I work in DTS,
and I can't stay off the stage.
I can't help it.
I've been on stage every day this week.
I think that might be a record, actually.
So I kind of adopted this
talk at the last minute.
Some of you may have been
expecting to see Gerard Ziemski,
who's our resident graphics guru.
But he had a small incident
come up Tuesday night.
So--
So Gerard won't be joining us.
I'm going to do the best I can
to sound as authoritative
as he would on this topic.
So what are we going to be talking about?
We're going to talk about the changes
that we've made in Java 1.4.2 Update 1.
You've got Developer Preview 3
available to you as of this week.
We're going to talk about
the architectural changes
we made specifically to
on-screen Java 2D drawing.
And we're going to talk about
improvements not only in correctness
and hopefully eliminating a lot of the
bugs that some of you have reported,
but as well the performance
improvements that we've seen
as a result of these changes.
We're going to talk very briefly
about Quartz 2D and its relationship
with Java and how that story has
changed with the announcements that
have come in with Tiger this week.
And we're going to talk a little
bit about the third-party APIs that
are new to Mac OS X as of the last
time we talked here last year,
specifically Java Advanced Imaging,
Java 3D, and JOGL,
which we affectionately know as jogl.
So Java2D on Mac OS X.
Like I said earlier,
we have a bunch of improvements
and some new features that we've
made available to you with DP3.
Among them is graphics
context management,
and I'm going to be saying
context a lot in this talk,
and within the context
of this presentation.
By context, I mean just a standard
Java graphics object,
the Java AWT graphics object.
We're going to talk
about state management,
the state of a Java graphics object,
and how we've worked around
a lot of problems that we've
had with that in the past.
We're going to talk about how
these changes affect and improve
multi-threaded drawing in Update 1.
We're going to talk about the
intelligent screen update mechanism
that we've introduced with DP3.
I believe that's new with DP3, right?
Okay.
And we're going to talk about some
improvements to full screen mode
drawing and XOR drawing as well.
So let's go right into it and
talk about context management.
Like I said,
it's a new mechanism in Update 1,
and it's completely independent
of the Cocoa drawing
context that we use beneath.
As you know,
the AWT in 1.4.2 and Java 1.4 is
built on top of the Cocoa App Kit.
Now, in the past, we used to share our
graphics contexts with Cocoa,
and it created a number of
problems or issues that we
needed to be delicate with.
And the most problematic one was
that sometimes Cocoa would prevent
Java from drawing altogether.
So if there was some painting things that
needed to be sent through the context,
Cocoa would sometimes deny
us the shared context,
and it would cause us to either skip
frames or paint methods altogether,
or at least delay the visual
appearance of painting on the screen.
So the new system improves performance
in addition to correctness and the
perceived quickness by the user.
Before, not only could the context
have been denied by Cocoa,
but it could have been
modified by Cocoa as well,
and we didn't necessarily know
what we were getting back.
And we needed time to reconcile those
states and make sure that the state
that you expected your Java Graphics 2D
object to be in was the same as the state
that we were using behind the scenes.
So now, because the contexts are
independent... ...we always know
the state of your Java context,
and we can start drawing
that much sooner.
And when I say state changes,
I mean things like color, clip,
anti-aliasing font,
all the set methods that you would
call on a Graphics 2D object.
All of those things we know at all
times now what those states are from
what you're setting in your Java code.
Before, we had to make sure whatever we
got back from Cocoa was synced with
what your Java code was expecting.
And now that we have
an independent context,
we no longer have to worry about that.
And that, obviously,
is less execution time and more
time devoted to painting operations.
Here's a visualization of
what I'm talking about.
It might sound a little confusing.
What you see here is,
we're having a little fun with it,
I guess.
You see Java and Cocoa basically
fighting over the same context.
And that checkered blue and
orange there is basically kind of
illustrating the unknown state that
a given shared context would be in,
in the original 1.4.2 release.
And whenever Java got it,
we needed to make sure it
wasn't in Cocoa's state.
We needed to make sure
it was in our state.
So now in 1.4.2 Update 1,
because we have our own contest
exclusively available to Java,
available to you,
we no longer have to worry about
any of that reconciliation.
Cocoa can do what it wants,
and Java can do what it wants.
This particularly is good
for multi-threaded drawing.
The improved context management
that I was just talking about
basically allows us to draw
correctly from multiple threads.
We don't have to worry about locking
or contention or anything like that.
It allows us to cache
graphics 2D objects.
Now that we don't have to worry about
state validity or anything like that,
you can safely cache a graphics 2D
object where in the past it was really,
really not a good idea.
And not only does this
make things more correct,
but it makes it very, very much faster.
And this is a huge benefit,
particularly to old applets from
the 1.0 and 1.1 days that maybe had
been doing a lot of multi-threaded
work from inside the browser.
And here's another illustration of that.
You can see this huge heavyweight
master lock that's basically blocking
or barring the entrance into all
these contexts from all the threads.
And in the past, you had Cocoa,
the main Cocoa drawing thread,
and all of your Java threads,
if you had multi-threaded drawing,
trying to go through the same locks,
through the same area.
Now with update one,
it's just the Java threads.
Because we have our own context and
because we have our management down,
much better.
It's a lot less work to go through from
multiple threads and draw to the screen.
And I'd like to invite Caroline up to
show us just what we're talking about.
Thanks, Matt.
So this demo is going to show
you the huge improvements we've
made in multi-threaded drawing
support in 1.4.2 Update 1.
First, I'll show you a demo of 1.4.2
doing some multi-threaded drawing,
or trying to.
The first square is actually
the normal repainting mechanism,
not multi-threaded,
where you make your paint method and
the events get posted to the AWT thread.
and the second square,
let me open this up again
so you can see it again.
The second square is using a
separate thread and calling
get graphics on each repaint.
The third and fourth squares are
each using two drawing threads,
but they're not working very well.
So if we go to 1.4.2 update 1 on demo 2.
On demo 2, please.
You can see that it looks a lot better,
and it's considerably
faster in all cases.
So these bottom two squares,
the third one is using two threads.
One's drawing in black and
one's drawing in yellow,
and it's using one cache
graphics object to draw into.
And the fourth square,
the green and black one,
there's a green thread
and a black thread,
basically,
each drawing a green or a black line,
and they're drawing into two
separate cache graphics objects.
So if you need to use
multi-threaded drawing,
it's now a real option for
you in using 1.4.2 Update 1.
All right, I'll hand it back to Matt.
- Thank you, Caroline.
You sure those were both
running the same hardware?
Same hardware.
OK.
Same demo.
You sure?
Okay,
so we just showed you that multi-threaded
drawing works a lot better in Update 1,
but we want to mention a few
things just for general advice.
[Transcript missing]
So the next thing we want to talk
about is intelligent screen updates.
And this is kind of the marketing term.
You may know it more
commonly as flushing.
So the thing that we were talking
about when we were coming up
with this mechanism is that
hardware is getting faster,
software optimizations
are always happening,
but displays are still fixed at
a relatively pretty slow rate.
Your application can usually draw
at 100 frames per second or more,
and the display is chugging along at 60,
70 hertz.
And so it seems like a waste of
time trying to push all this stuff
up to the screen when it's not
going to refresh anyway physically.
So what update one does now is it only
updates the screen when it's necessary,
when we know it's possible.
You can see the thing on the screen here.
It says 100 Java updates.
There's more than 60 screen updates.
There's no point in actually
performing that flush operation
if you're not going to see it.
Now, this might sound a little scary,
but we've done a lot of work
to make sure it's correct,
and we're not skipping
any paints or dropping any
frames or anything like that.
There shouldn't be any
visible difference.
Well, there should be something
of a visible difference,
and that's that drawing should
actually be faster as a result.
Much to the tune of the state
management and the state reconciliation
I was talking about earlier,
we're spending less time
waiting for screen updates.
So we're wasting less time doing that.
We're wasting less time doing
that when it's redundant anyway,
and that gives us more time to
process your next paint event.
Also, full screen mode.
This is a place where
we've gotten a lot of,
I'll call it, feedback on.
We've re-implemented it
primarily for correctness,
and in doing so, we also did a lot in
the speed department.
And actually, it wasn't that complicated
a re-architecture.
We basically changed from
a blip buffer strategy,
which is basically copying the
bits directly from the back
buffer into the front buffer,
which is a particularly
expensive operation.
We changed that into a
flip buffer strategy,
where you have a front and back buffer,
and then just flip those from one
to the other back on the screen.
The former front buffer
is now your back buffer,
where you do your next
frame worth of drawing.
And I think Caroline's going to
show us what that looks like.
So I've got one more,
another before and after demo.
Here we have a full screen
application running in 1.4.2.
And what this is trying to do is it's
trying to maintain 30 frames per second.
But since we're only getting
10 frames per second,
there's only going to be one ball.
The more, it continues to add balls until
it reaches 30 frames per second.
So one ball.
But if we move to 1.4.2
update 1 on demo 2,
please.
You can see it keeps on putting in balls
until it reaches 30 frames per second.
How high are we going to get?
This is a pretty fabulous improvement.
Full screen is now a really
good option for you if you
want to use it on Mac OS X.
All right, back to Matt.
Thank you very much, Caroline.
I don't know if you had seen,
had any of you used Puzzle
Pirates before when you had seen
Scott's deploying demo earlier?
Puzzle Pirates did not used
to do too well in full screen,
and obviously Scott was demoing
it in DP3 the other day.
But yeah,
one ball at 10 frames per second,
600 balls at 30.
That's 1800x, I think.
And that's all software changes,
so Gerard did a good job there.
So we also want to
talk about XOR drawing.
Last but not least, well,
maybe it is least,
we did a lot of work to improve
the correctness of XOR drawing.
And this has been a
perpetual thorn in our side.
And the main reason being is that Quartz,
which is what our Java2D drawing
mechanism is built on top of,
doesn't support XOR natively.
And if you've been to any
of the Quartz sessions,
you may have heard this from
the Quartz engineers themselves.
So we've had to implement
it for you on our own.
And the correctness should be there now,
but obviously there's going
to be a cost because we've
implemented it all on our own.
So the performance may
not be what you expect.
And it probably never will
be because Quartz simply
doesn't support it natively.
And so what that means is
that you should probably,
if you feel like you need to
use XOR drawing for some reason,
you should probably talk to us
to see what you really need to
do and see if we can offer some
kind of alternatives for you.
So we've had to implement
it for you on our own.
And so what that means is
that you should probably,
if you feel like you need to
use XOR drawing for some reason,
you should probably talk to us
to see what you really need to
do and see if we can offer some
kind of alternatives for you.
Things like alpha composites,
if you need to do, blending operations.
And the other thing that Barry and
Tom mentioned already on Wednesday is
that if you're doing XOR to erase things,
you're doing a double
draw to erase some text,
for example,
anti-aliased text is not going to
be erased by XOR drawing because
of the anti-aliasing operations.
Those are not taken into account
when you do an XOR operation.
So even if that was your
real reason for using XOR,
it's not going to work anyway.
And if you need to do an erase operation,
the best thing to do is to
keep your static scenes,
the before,
the before modification scenes
in something like an off-screen
buffered image and then push
that to the screen when you need
to do your erase or your undo.
So what are all the performance
gains as a result of all these
things we're talking about?
Well, I mentioned the context
management changes.
We're no longer waiting for
Cocoa's permission to draw.
We don't have to do any guesswork
on the state from when Cocoa may
or may not have modified it.
And we've got safe context
caching for multi-threaded
drawing if you want to do that.
The intelligent update mechanism
means we spend less time waiting
for the screen and more time
actually executing your paint code.
And the full-screen drawing change
from a blip buffer to a flip buffer,
that's almost a tongue twister,
that change is really, as you saw,
quite an improvement in performance.
And here's just a quick graph of some
of our internal benchmarks as well as
the standard ones like the Java2D demo
and the SwingMark benchmark in Aqua.
We've seen anywhere between 20%
and 50% improvement just with
these software changes in DP3.
And I think Caroline's going to give us
one more demo of the overall changes.
All right.
This is the last before and after demo.
This is really similar to what you may
have seen in the Java State of the Union,
except in Java State of the Union,
we compared ourselves to Windows.
And here, since we've been talking
about the graphics changes,
we're comparing ourselves to ourselves.
So this is the Java 2D demo
running in 1.4.2.
And the important point to
notice is that we're getting
around 115 frames per second.
Alright, so in 1.4.2 update 1 on demo 2,
getting more than twice that, around 200,
250 sometimes.
So these are significant improvements.
I think you're really going to like them.
All right.
Back over to Matt.
Matt Draance: Thank you, Caroline.
So I think you can see we've been doing
a lot of work to speed things up for you.
And also, you know,
it's hard to demonstrate correctness.
The multi-threaded drawing
demo did a good job at that.
But hopefully you guys will
see this in your applications.
And we'd like to hear your
feedback if it is or if it is not.
Either way, we want to make sure we're
doing the right thing before
we release this update.
So let's talk a little bit about Tiger.
I don't have a demo for you,
but as you probably heard,
Quartz 2D is going to be hardware
accelerated using OpenGL in 10.4.
And because we're built on top
of Quartz to do our 2D drawing,
this is just going to be faster
Java graphics for free without any
work that you need to do or even
much that the Java team needs to do.
And I have again on there is
because some of you from the 1.3
days may remember that we had an
OpenGL pipeline of our own in Java.
And you might wonder why that went away.
Well, that's because the gentleman
who was working on that for
Java is now working on Quartz.
And if you're wondering why hardware
acceleration went away from Java,
it's because it went to
the whole system instead.
And thank you for waiting,
and you should have it very soon now.
And the difference between the
Tiger hardware acceleration and what
you may have been used to in 1.3 is
that it really does look like Quartz.
In 1.3, the hardware acceleration
looked like OpenGL.
And in Tiger,
it's going to look like Quartz.
It's going to have the anti-aliasing
and all the things that you
expect from Quartz drawing.
So we've been talking
about what we've done.
I wanted to talk a little bit
about what you guys can do.
This is kind of a repeat of
things that we said last year,
but they're still very important tips,
so I wanted to put them on here.
The big thing with images in particular
is that you need to make sure
that you are using an image format
that's compatible to the system.
And when I say when you're using images,
I'm talking about creating new
images that you're going to draw
into to paint onto the screen later.
Using methods like toolkit create image,
graphics configuration
create compatible image,
that line's actually a lot longer.
You need to do about three or four
other static getters before you
get to a graphics configuration.
But static images,
meaning things that you've loaded
from a JPEG file using imageio.read,
new image icons, so on and so forth,
those things will be fine.
We will optimize those for
you once they're decoded.
As far as new images that you're
going to do drawing operations into,
make sure you use these
compatible image APIs.
Things like particularly the index
color formats that are very popular
on Windows because they're low memory.
That image format is not
compatible on Mac OS X,
and we're going to need
to do pixel conversion for
every operation that you do.
And that brings me to that third
bullet there that says if you
must use a non-native image,
please avoid doing direct
pixel manipulation.
Because every time you have to go get
the data buffer and get the raster,
we'll need to convert those
pixels from whatever the image
format is to a new image format.
So if you're going to do something
that Quartz can actually read,
we'll need to do that every single time.
If you use general Java drawing
methods like draw string,
draw line,
we can fake that and not worry about
doing the conversion every single time.
And obviously that on-the-fly
conversion is going to be expensive.
So if you can, please use the compatible
image formats and try to avoid
using something non-native.
So let's talk about
some of the new things.
It's not exactly new anymore.
We announced it, I believe,
in December or so.
But we haven't talked
about it on stage yet.
So I wanted to mention that
Java AI is now available on Mac OS X.
You saw a demo this Monday night
with the Mars Rover,
the gentleman from the
JPL labs in Pasadena.
and you know, it basically brings high
performance image processing,
a number of new formats that are not
available in the standard Java AWT.
You can do image
processing over a network.
We did implement the native media
libcode from Sun and brought it over to
Mac OS X so you can get the performance
that you would expect from JAI.
And it's going to be included with Tiger.
It's currently a download for you and
more importantly for your users if
you're writing in JAI for Panther.
It's available as a download.
In Tiger, it will be pre-installed,
and you won't have to worry about it.
And to the same tune,
Java3D was made available
at the same time.
It's a higher level 3D model.
It's not really a direct
3D programming API.
It's intended for higher level
scene graphing and things like that.
It is platform independent,
so you can write applets
and applications in 3D.
We implemented...
We implemented Java3D with
OpenGL and Core Audio for the audio.
And like Java AI,
it'll be available in Tiger and
currently available for
Panther as a separate download.
And there's one other
thing to talk about,
which is JOGL.
I'd like to bring Ken Russell up
to talk to you about that.
Good afternoon.
So my name is Ken Russell.
I'm at Sun Microsystems,
and I'm one of the authors
of the JOGL package that you
may or may not have used.
And Gerard and I worked a
bit on the JOGL port to OS X.
So what is this package?
It's a binding,
a Java binding for the OpenGL 3D API that
works on as many platforms
as we could make it work on.
In particular, OS X, it works on Linux,
it works on Solaris, it works on, yeah,
Windows.
And the intent here is to
let you write portable,
fast 3D applications in Java.
The binding is open source.
It's part of Sun's
Java gaming initiative.
You can get the source code on java.net.
It's one of the core gaming API projects.
We've got bindings to JOAL,
the open audio library.
We've got an input device
binding called JInput,
which lets you get inputs from, you know,
joysticks and keypads
and stuff like that.
Some of the features of this
OpenGL binding versus some of
the others that are out there are
first of all that it supports all
the stuff that's in OpenGL 1.5.
So you use this,
you get all the latest stuff,
all the latest vendor extensions.
You can do vertex programs,
fragment programs, shader objects,
all this stuff.
It's got portable support for P buffers.
So you can do hardware
accelerated off-screen
rendering in a portable fashion,
get the results on screen very quickly.
And where necessary,
you can actually dive down to
the vendor-specific extensions.
So it's like if you actually had to
use the wiggle APIs for some things,
you could do that.
You can sort of test to see what
platform you're on and then dive
down into those APIs if necessary.
We are working on
standardizing this binding.
And the real reason for this is so
that we can get some amount of sort
of compatibility guarantee for you,
the developer, on all the platforms that
you're going to be deploying on.
And another intent here is to try
to get the mobile device space
and the desktop device space where
J2ME and SE have a bit of a rift.
We're trying to make the OpenGL bindings
for these two platforms as similar
as possible so that you'll be able
to effectively write a desktop app.
And maybe when the cell phone
market and hardware acceleration
down there catches up,
you'll actually be able to
deploy basically the same
app on a mobile device,
which would be really, really cool.
So as I mentioned before,
JOGL supports multiple platforms.
And what I'd like to point
out here are two things.
First of all,
even if you're not using the
AWT and that sort of framework and
you're using the Cocoa framework,
you can use the
Java bindings for Mac OS X.
JOGL actually supports that
configuration explicitly.
So you can instantiate a little
Mac OS X GL Impel object and then
treat it in exactly the same way as
you would in an AWT-based JOGL app.
And it works.
And we've got -- unfortunately,
we don't have a demo
today showing this off,
but there have been demos developed in
the past which have stressed this out.
Another thing to mention is, again,
the fact that we're working on
a lot of things in the future.
So we're going to show you a
little bit of the full screen
support that was just shown that's
working great with JOGL and OS X.
So you can write full screen,
fully hardware accelerated
games and apps.
And we're going to actually show
one today that's pretty cool.
And I see a point here on the
slide that I did not know,
which is that this works well with
the new OpenGL profiler on -- oh,
wait.
Is this Shark or is this -- okay.
So, well, it's working with the
OpenGL profiler on OS X,
so it looks like you can get
fairly detailed information about
what's going on in your apps.
There are also a couple of -- I'm sorry.
There are pipelines available
for the JOGL binding.
And these let you get debugging
and tracing information.
And this is sort of a
Java-specific feature,
but it's extremely useful when
you're trying to debug something
that's going wrong in your app.
It will basically stop at the point
of failure at the actual OpenGL call
that made the error state in the state
machine and give you a backtrace,
which is pretty helpful.
So what I'd like to show you is a really
cool demo done by a couple of crazy guys
over in Germany called Bytonic Software.
I assume that this is a play on
words of bionic versus bytonic.
But so if we could go to
the demo 2 machine -- oh,
wait.
Aha.
Wrong machine.
Okay.
What we're going to see
here is a full-screen app.
Full screen little game that
you guys may have seen before.
This is Quake 2.
Now, what are you looking at here?
This is not a new engine written in Java.
Turn the sound down just a tad.
Um, okay, so what you're looking at
here is not a new engine.
Let me kill some guys here,
maybe they'll shut up a bit.
Mute.
On the keyboard, huh?
Ah, nifty.
Okay, thank you.
All right,
so what we're looking at here is it's not
a pure Java new sort of engine that is
written to use the Quake 2 file format.
This is a port to the
Java programming language of the
original C source for Quake 2.
Whoa.
Hold on a sec,
I'm going to kill some bad guys.
Yeah, I got to take care of
some business first.
Okay.
All right.
Yeah.
Okay.
So this is a port,
a straight transliteration of the
C sources for Quake 2 that were
available via the GPL on id's website
to the Java programming language.
All right.
They used jogl at the bottom layer
to get to the graphics subsystem,
and they did whatever data
structure conversion was
necessary from C to Java to be
able to use the pack file format,
the original data files
from the game in this port.
support.
This is running at over 85% of the
speed of the original C sources.
At this point,
there is no reason to not write
your next game in the Java language.
This binary runs on multiple platforms.
It runs on OS X, it runs on Linux,
it runs on Windows, it runs on Solaris.
Okay, no porting necessary.
And now you can do even more cool
stuff because you're in Java.
You can ship bytecodes around
the net and it's all safe.
You can load new stuff in,
new functionality,
download it to the client.
You don't have to worry about, you know,
oh gee, did I just open up the door
for the next Sasser virus,
for example,
because you've got a security manager
in place and the access is all safe
to the underlying hardware features.
So this is actually an
open source project.
You can go to the Bytonic software
website and the demo is called Jake2 for,
you know, Quake 2 to Java.
So what you can do is just
Google for Jake2 and they are,
I think, the first hit.
There are websites out there.
You can get the binaries,
you can get the source code,
and I would encourage you to send
them feedback because I think
that this is just awesome stuff.
They did what a lot of us have been
talking about doing for a long time,
which is, gee,
what would happen if we had the
huge commercial apps side by side,
C and Java?
How fast would it be?
This is showing that
it's pretty darn fast.
I think that's pretty much it.
Thanks a lot, Ken.
Awesome.
Well, thanks, Ken.
I kind of hijacked Ken with
that OpenGL profiler bullet.
At the last minute,
we decided he was going
to say this slide.
So, yeah, he didn't know about that.
I was talking to some of the OpenGL guys,
as well as Gerard,
about the fact that you can
use the OpenGL profiler to
profile a jogl application.
Now, it's not going to give you, I mean,
it is a C-based profiler.
But because jogl, or J-O-G-L,
is a wrapper, it's pretty straightforward
as to what it's talking about.
And you get a list of functions,
and they may be C functions.
But, you know,
the names are very similar,
and it's usually pretty easy to tell
what's going on in your jogl app versus
what the OpenGL profiler is reporting.
And again, we demoed JAG 2.
That's the bitonic.de, as in Germany,
link if you want to check it out.
And yeah, it's pretty cool.
We've been playing it quite a bit.
So in conclusion,
we're going to let you guys out
early today because it's Friday,
but we're working on it.
We've heard a lot of your feedback,
and we know that we've
had a lot of work to do,
and we've done a lot of it.
We've done a lot to improve
correctness in drawing.
drawing performance.
We've done a lot with system integration,
especially we've been working
very closely with the Quartz
team to make sure that everything
in Tiger is working smoothly,
not only for Quartz,
but for Java as well.
And we've got these new
APIs available to you,
Java3D, JavaAI, and of course, JOGL.
Thank you.
We want to make sure that you
do use your images wisely.
Use the Java APIs to
create a compatible format.
And try not to manipulate pixels directly
if you don't know what kind of format
you're using or what you need to use.
And check out jogl.
And write your games in Java.
You really can do it now.
There's really nothing stopping you.
So for more information,
obviously we gave you
the Bitonic link earlier.
We've got a DMG, of course,
with every session.
The reference library is available
to you for all the Java items.
We should have a tech note
coming out for image performance
tips and the kind of things that
I talked very much in brief today.
And there's a great article,
which is not new at all,
about painting in AWT and Swing and
what the expected behavior should
be on a standard Java2 platform.
And these are the kind of rules
or guidelines that you should
keep in mind when you start to do
a lot of heavy drawing in Java.
This is a really priceless article,
and it's very similar to some of
the stuff I talked about today.
I took a lot of my
information from that article.
The JOGL homepage is off java.net.
And, of course,
you can go to java.sun.com for
anything else you're interested in.
in that's not listed here.